# 4 Day Workout Split – The Complete Guide 2024

  * [ Written by Desmond McNamee  ](https://www.hevyapp.com/author/desmond/)

## What is the 4 Day Split?

The four day split workout is a [workout
plan](https://www.hevyapp.com/workout-plans-for-every-fitness-level/) that
involves 4 weekly gym sessions. Each session targets a specific set of
muscles. It tries to maximize exertion on the target muscle groups while
allowing other muscles to recover on days when they aren’t being used. It’s
also worth checking out the [2 Day Workout Split
](https://www.hevyapp.com/2-day-split-workout/)or [3 Day Workout
Split](https://www.hevyapp.com/3-day-split-workout-complete-guide/) if having
only 2-3 workouts per week fits your schedule better, or our 5 Day Workout
Split if you prefer.

In this article we’ll break down common variations of the 4 day split workout,
including sample routines. We’ll also help you figure out if the 4 day split
is a good fit for your workout routine.

## Popular 4 Day Split Variations

### Upper Lower

The [Upper Lower 4 Day Split](https://www.hevyapp.com/upper-lower-split-
complete-guide/) Workout divides the four workout sessions into 2 days of
upper body training and two days of lower body training. Working out half your
body each session means you’ll be training a wide range of muscles groups. The
idea is to exert one half of your body while the other half rests. Remember
rest days are [just as important](https://www.healthline.com/health/exercise-
fitness/rest-day#benefits) as gym days. Another key benefit is you’ll be
training each muscle group 2x a week which has been shown to [result in
significantly greater muscle
growth](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27102172/) when compared to just
working each muscle group 1x per week (See Bro Split).  

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://www.hevyapp.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/06/4-day-split-upper-lower-1024x643.jpg)

### [Push Pull](https://www.hevyapp.com/push-pull-legs-ultimate-guide/)

The [Push Pull](https://www.hevyapp.com/push-pull-legs-ultimate-guide/) split
is similar to the [Upper Lower Split](https://www.hevyapp.com/upper-lower-
split-complete-guide/) and provides a lot of the same benefits. Again you’ll
alternate targeting half your body in each session. Push days include
exercises where you’re pushing (Bench Press, Squat) and generally target the
muscles in the front of your body. Pull days include exercises where you’re
pulling (Pull Ups, Bent Over Row) and generally target the back of the body.

**Push Day Muscle Groups** : Chest, shoulders, triceps, quadriceps, and calves  
**Pull Day Muscle Groups** : Entire back, biceps, hamstrings, and obliques

The biggest benefit of a [push pull](https://www.hevyapp.com/push-pull-legs-
ultimate-guide/) split is that you’re able maximise weekly set count for all
your major muscle groups because you’re working them out twice a week. There’s
lots of research that shows targeting the same muscle group multiple times per
week is [optimal in terms of muscle
regeneration](https://www.researchgate.net/publication/14636206_The_Time_Course_for_Elevated_Muscle_Protein_Synthesis_Following_Heavy_Resistance_Exercise).

![classic bodybuilder bro split 4 day
routine](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![classic
bodybuilder bro split 4 day routine](https://www.hevyapp.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/06/4-day-split-push-pull-1024x606.jpg)

### Classic Bodybuilder (Bro Split)

The classic bodybuilder 4 day split (sometimes called the Bro Split) is the
meat and potatoes of four-day splits. It involves training a specific isolated
muscle group in each workout. It generally splits the sessions into the back,
chest, arms, and legs (quads, hamstrings, outer/[inner
thighs](https://www.hevyapp.com/inner-thigh-workout/)).

It allows you to focus entirely on a small set of muscles per session and
gives a full week of recovery for each muscle group. A major benefit of
focusing on a single muscle group per session is you can give priority to
weaker muscle groups.

In recent years, there’s been a lot of research done that calls into question
the [effectiveness of working out a single muscle per
workout](https://mennohenselmans.com/high-frequency-resistance-training-is-
not-more-effective-than-low-frequency-resistance-training-in-increasing-
muscle-mass-and-strength-in-well-trained-men/). Regardless of the controversy,
the Classic Bodybuilder split is a tried and true method that countless
extremely successful lifters swear by for results.  

![classic bodybuilder bro split 4 day
routine](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![classic
bodybuilder bro split 4 day routine](https://www.hevyapp.com/wp-
content/uploads/2020/06/4-day-split-bro-split-1024x558.jpg)

## Is a 4 Day Split Workout for me?

Working out 4 days a week gives you plenty of time in the gym to build a
balanced routine that engages all parts of the body. It plays especially well
with [Upper/Lower](https://www.hevyapp.com/upper-lower-split-complete-guide/)
and Push/Pull type splits because it gives you a balanced 2 days for each
variation. It also gives you a good balance of exertion vs rest days that’s
important for avoiding overtraining.

In a 4 day split, you can get away with shorter sessions than you can in the
[3 Day Split](https://www.hevyapp.com/3-day-split-workout-complete-guide/),
just because you have that extra day to train. Shorter sessions means you can
focus more on quality sets, which can suffer if you’re trying to cram too much
stuff into a single workout.

## Conclusion

Working out in a four day split is a great way to get results and bring your
workout routine to the next level. Whether you choose an [Upper
Lower](https://www.hevyapp.com/upper-lower-split-complete-guide/), Push Pull
or Classic Bodybuilder split the most important thing for results is
consistency. Pick a plan that you enjoy and don’t be afraid to switch it up
after a while if you start getting bored. If you feel like tracking your
workouts, be sure to check out [Hevy](https://www.hevyapp.com/)!  

