# Push Pull Legs (PPL) – The Ultimate Workout Program Guide

  * [ Written by Guillem Ros  ](https://www.hevyapp.com/author/guillemros/)

## What is The Push Pull Legs Training Program?

If you’re looking for a practical way to program your training, you’ve
undoubtedly come across the famous Push Pull Legs split. This training method
has been around for a while, and many people today swear by its efficacy and
usefulness. The Push-Pull Legs split is a way of organizing your weekly
workouts by dividing your training into three categories: push exercises, pull
exercises, and legs exercises.

With this split, you combine different muscle groups with similar functions
and train them together. Instead of training them separately, you can bundle
them together, work them hard, and then give them sufficient time to recover
before training them again. Below you can see what muscle groups each training
day includes.

**Push Muscle groups**  
Chest  
[Shoulders](https://www.hevyapp.com/dumbbell-shoulder-workout/)  
Triceps| **Pull Muscle groups**  
Back  
Biceps  
Rear deltoids| **Legs**  
Quads  
Hamstrings  
Glutes  
Calves  
---|---|---  
  
For example, your [chest](https://www.hevyapp.com/lower-chest-workout/),
shoulders, and triceps are all involved in pushing exercises
([1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5504579/),[
2](https://journals.lww.com/nsca-
jscr/Fulltext/2010/07000/An_Electromyography_Analysis_of_3_Muscles.31.aspx)).
By training them in the same workout, you stimulate them sufficiently and then
allow them to recuperate while doing pull and legs training or resting.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://www.hevyapp.com/wp-
content/uploads/logan-weaver-MXnkWolg3Ug-unsplash-1.jpg)

Aside from push workouts, this split also has you do pull and leg training.
Your pull workouts involve your back, biceps, and rear deltoids, as these
muscles work together on pulling and rowing exercises
([3](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC449729/)).

Your [leg training](https://www.hevyapp.com/leg-workouts-and-lower-body-
exercises/) is similar to lower-body training on the upper/lower split and leg
training on a bro split. The goal here is to train your entire lower body –
your quads, hamstrings, glutes, and calves. This way of splitting your weekly
training can be quite beneficial on numerous fronts. Let’s take a look at some
of them.

**Contents** hide

1 What is The Push Pull Legs Training Program?

2 Ready to get started?

3 Designing a Push Pull Legs Workout Split

4 The Push Pull Legs – 3 Day Training Plan

4.1 Push Workout

4.2 Pull Workout

4.3 Legs Workout

5 The Science Behind the Push Pull Legs plan

6 Ready to get started?

7 Main Push Exercises

7.1 1\. Bench Press

7.2 2\. Incline Bench Press

7.3 3\. Overhead Press

7.4 4\. Floor Press (Barbell)

8 Main Pull Exercises

8.1 1\. Bent Over Row (Barbell)

8.2 2\. Pull Up And Chin Up

8.3 3\. Seated Cable Row – Wide Grip

8.4 4\. Bicep Curl (Barbell)

9 Main Legs Exercises

9.1 1\. Squat (Barbell)

10 Ready to get started?

10.1 2\. Bulgarian Split Squat

10.2 3\. Romanian Deadlift (Barbell)

10.3 4\. Glute Ham Raise

11 The Benefits Of The Push Pull Legs

11.1 1\. It’s a Simple And Convenient Way to Organize Your Training

11.2 2\. There Is No Overlap in Muscle Groups

11.3 3\. It Offers A Fair Bit of Scheduling Flexibility

11.4 4\. It Works For Lifters Of All Levels

12 Who Is The Push Pull Legs Workout Program For?

13 Rest Days On the Push Pull Legs

14 What Are The Pros And Cons of Push Pull Legs?

14.1 Pros

14.2 Cons

15 Comparison With Other Training Plans

15.1 Push Pull Legs vs. 3-Day Split

15.2 Push Pull Legs vs. Upper Lower Split

15.3 Push Pull Legs vs. Bro Split

16 Conclusion

17 Ready to get started?

18 Frequently Asked Questions

## **Designing a Push Pull Legs Workout Split**

Let’s get a bit more practical. Here are three possible ways to schedule a
Push Pull Legs split:

**3-day Push Pull Legs**  
Monday – Push Day  
Tuesday – Off  
Wednesday – Pull Day  
Thursday – Off  
Friday – Legs Day  
Saturday – Off  
Sunday – Off| **4-day Push Pull Legs**  
**Week 1**  
Monday – Push Day  
Tuesday – Pull Day  
Wednesday – Off  
Thursday – Legs  
Friday – Off  
Saturday – Push  
Sunday – Off  
**Week 2 – etc…**| **6-day Push Pull Legs**  
Monday – Push Day  
Tuesday – Pull Day  
Wednesday – Legs  
Thursday – Push Day  
Friday – Pull Day  
Saturday – Legs  
Sunday – Off  
---|---|---  
  
The 3-day split will work best for most people because it offers a consistent
schedule, and you have a fair amount of flexibility to move your workouts
around when life happens. Training three days per week is also enough to
optimize hypertrophy for most people because it allows for a fair amount of
training volume. This training frequency is also incredibly sustainable for
most people, and you don’t have to be in the gym over the weekend.

A 4-day split is also a viable option, but it carries some significant
drawbacks. Namely, you have a different training schedule every week, and you
have far less flexibility to move around workouts. Can it deliver superior
results? Well, possibly. One extra training day per week can help boost
hypertrophy gains a bit. But is the potential benefit worth the drawbacks? It
likely isn’t.

The 6-day split, like [the Arnold split](https://www.hevyapp.com/arnold-split-
workout/), is also similar to the 3-day one and offers some of the same
benefits. But, because this is such a demanding split, you should only
consider it if you’re quite advanced and need to do a lot of training volume
to keep growing optimally.

## **The Push Pull Legs – 3 Day Training Plan**

![workout routine calendar push pull
legs](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![workout
routine calendar push pull legs](https://www.hevyapp.com/wp-
content/uploads/push-pull-legs-workout-plan-1-1024x667.png)

Let’s take what we’ve learned so far and put together an effective 3-day Push
Pull Legs plan:

### **Push Workout**

  * [Bench Press (Barbell)](https://www.hevyapp.com/exercises/how-to-bench-press-barbell/) – 3 sets of 8 to 12 reps
  * [Incline Press (Dumbbell)](https://www.hevyapp.com/exercises/how-to-incline-bench-press-dumbbell/) – 3 sets of 8 to 12 reps
  * Seated Shoulder Press (Dumbbell) – 3 sets of 8 to 12 reps
  * [Lateral Raise (Dumbbell)](https://www.hevyapp.com/exercises/how-to-lateral-raise-dumbbell/) – 3 sets of 12 to 15 reps
  * Skullcrushers (Dumbbell) – 3 sets of 10 to 15 reps
  * Tricep Rope Pushdown – 3 sets of 12 to 20 reps

### **Pull Workout**

  * Pull Up or Chin Up – 3 sets of 6 to 12 reps
  * Bent Over Row (Barbell) – 3 sets of 6 to 12 reps
  * Seated Cable Row – Wide Grip – 3 sets of 10 to 15 reps
  * Dumbbell Row – 2 sets of 10 to 15 reps
  * [Bicep Curl (Barbell)](https://www.hevyapp.com/exercises/how-to-bicep-curl-barbell/) – 3 sets of 8 to 12 reps
  * Preacher Curl (Machine) – 2 sets of 12 to 20 reps
  * Face Pull – 2 to 3 sets of 12 to 25 reps

### **Legs Workout**

  * Squat (Barbell) – 3 sets of 6 to 10 reps
  * Romanian Deadlift (Barbell) – 3 sets of 6 to 10 reps
  * Bulgarian Split Squat – 3 sets of 8 to 15 reps
  * Glute Ham Raise – 3 sets of 10 to 15 reps
  * Standing Calf Raise (Machine) – 3 sets of 8 to 15 reps

This is a typical 3-day intermediate-level Push Pull Legs workout. The
exercises are standard, and you can substitute them for other alternatives,
depending on your preferences and available equipment. For example, you can
replace the dumbbell bench press version with a barbell if you wish. Our app
has an extensive exercise library, and you can pick from many movements.

The repetition ranges we’ve assigned to the individual movements are also not
set in stone, and you can modify them to some degree. For example, if you
prefer doing more repetitions on an exercise like the standing calf raise, you
can do 12 to 25 or 15 to 30 instead of our prescribed 8 to 15 reps.

As a whole, almost everything within this program is subject to change, and
nothing is set in stone.Depending on your primary goals, preferences, and
available equipment, you can make some changes to make the program better
suited for you.

As far as recovery days go, you have four each week, and it’s a good idea to
give yourself one-day in-between workouts for adequate recovery. For example,
you can train on Monday, Wednesday, and Friday, or Tuesday, Thursday, and
Saturday.

## **The Science Behind the Push Pull Legs plan**

Besides the many benefits of scheduling and flexibility, the Push-Pull Legs
plan is backed by some decent research.

> The Push Pull Legs split is well suited for a higher training frequency.
> Meaning, we can use it to train our muscles more than once per week.
> According to the most recent literature, training our muscles twice per week
> is better than once if hypertrophy is the main goal
> ([13](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27102172/)).

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://www.hevyapp.com/wp-
content/uploads/john-arano-h4i9G-de7Po-unsplash.jpg)

If you typically train three times per week and can’t make it more often, then
make sure to do enough training volume to grow. According to research, that
would mean at least 10 sets per muscle group per week seem to deliver superior
results ([14](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6303131/)). For
larger muscles such as your chest, back, and quads, you can aim for 12 to 16
weekly sets. For smaller muscles like your biceps, triceps, and
[shoulders,](https://www.hevyapp.com/dumbbell-shoulder-workout/) you can aim
for 6 to 10 weekly sets.

For example, you can achieve a twice-weekly frequency for all muscle groups by
training six times per week. Like so:

Monday – Push  
Tuesday – Pull  
Wednesday – Legs  
Thursday – Push  
Friday – Pull  
Saturday – Legs  
Sunday – Off

Earlier in this guide, we said that this frequency is most likely better for
more advanced individuals. And, of course, if you’re highly advanced and you
need to do more work to keep growing, then you should consider it. But, we can
also make an argument for less experienced lifters using this frequency.

For example, if you can’t spend much time in the gym but can make it _every
day_ , then using a higher frequency can be a great way to spread your weekly
volume into more frequent but shorter sessions. For example, instead of having
three 20-set workouts, you can have six 10-set ones. That way, you can do all
of your weekly work and enjoy shorter and less demanding workouts. Plus, you
get to train all muscle groups twice per week, which can be beneficial.

There is also the idea of volume overlap. You see, organizing our weekly
training is a bit more nuanced than most people imagine. For example, if you
follow a typical bro split where you train one muscle group per day, the risk
of overlap is much higher. This is because multiple muscles often work
together on different exercises.

Take the bench press: This movement primarily trains your chest, but it also
involves your triceps and [shoulders ](https://www.hevyapp.com/dumbbell-
shoulder-
workout/)([1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5504579/),[
2](https://journals.lww.com/nsca-
jscr/Fulltext/2010/07000/An_Electromyography_Analysis_of_3_Muscles.31.aspx)).
By bundling these muscles in a single workout – as is the case in this split –
you essentially ‘get them out of the way,’ and they have enough time to
recover before they have to work again.

## **Main Push Exercises**

Let’s take a look at some of the most effective push exercises you can use for
mass and strength:

### **1\. Bench Press**

Bench Press – Works chest, shoulders, and triceps.

The [flat bench press](https://www.hevyapp.com/exercises/how-to-bench-press-
barbell/) is among the best chest-building movements out there. Over the
years, countless people have used the dumbbell and barbell variations of the
movement to build impressive pecs. Research also suggests that the flat press
causes significant EMG activity
([1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5504579/)). If you’re
unfamiliar, EMG (Electromyography) is a procedure that records and evaluates
the electrical activity of our muscles.

What’s more, the flat press has a fantastic overloading potential, which makes
it one of the best exercises you can use as the foundation of your chest
training. This is a fantastic [chest exercise for
women](https://www.hevyapp.com/chest-exercises-for-women/) and men alike.

### **2\. Incline Bench Press**

Despite what some experts suggest, the flat press is not sufficient to cause
even development in the entire pec, and this is why adding an [incline
press](https://www.hevyapp.com/exercises/how-to-incline-bench-press-dumbbell/)
variation is so valuable. According to research, pressing at an angle of about
45 degrees leads to significantly higher activation of the chest’s clavicular
portion ([2](https://journals.lww.com/nsca-
jscr/Fulltext/2010/07000/An_Electromyography_Analysis_of_3_Muscles.31.aspx),[
4](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25799093/)). It’s important to experiment
with several settings to see what [angle works best for your
chest](https://www.hevyapp.com/lower-chest-workout/).

### **3\. Overhead Press**

We can’t have a complete push workout without a movement that directly works
our shoulders, and this is where the overhead press comes to play. The
overhead press is one of the best movements we can use to train the front and
lateral side of the shoulder, and, much like the other variations, it offers a
fantastic overloading potential.

According to some research, performing the overhead press from a standing
position seems best ([5](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23096062/)). But, you
can do it seated if you prefer, and the difference shouldn’t be much.

### **4\. Floor Press (Barbell)**

The floor press is much less popular than the other exercises on the list, but
it appears quite effective. Although the floor press lacks a good stretch of
the pecs, studies suggest that it still offers good EMG activity. According to
research carried out by Bret Contreras, the floor press is a fantastic pec
activator. So much so that it ranks as one of the top exercises for mind-chest
activation.

## **Main Pull Exercises**

Let’s take a look at four of the most effective pull exercises:

### **1\. Bent Over Row (Barbell)**

The barbell row is a horizontal pulling exercise that does a great job of
developing the entire back. Thanks to the great overloading potential and
biomechanics, bent over rows develop the mid-back, traps, and lats. This helps
bring out the thickness, as well as width in the back. What’s more, because
you have to keep your torso rigid, the bent over row also develops the lower
back.

The two most important things you need to keep in mind are to keep your torso
as parallel to the floor as possible and row the barbell through the full
range of motion without using momentum or jerking.

### **2\. Pull Up And Chin Up**

Pull ups and chin ups are two of the best bodyweight movements you can use for
back strength and width. In an experiment done by the American Council of
Exercise, pull-ups and chin-ups came out as the top two for lat activation.
The chin-up offers a slightly better bicep activation due to the grip, but
both are fantastic back-builders.

Related article: **[21 Pull Up Variations for All
Levels](https://www.hevyapp.com/21-pullup-variations/)**

### **3\. Seated Cable Row – Wide Grip**

This is one of the best movements for back development because it offers a
greater range of motion.

To perform it effectively, add a wide attachment to the rowing machine and sit
down. The goal is to row the weight through the full range of motion and allow
a great stretch of the lats at the start and a strong contraction in the end
portion.

### **4\. Bicep Curl (Barbell)**

The [barbell curl](https://www.hevyapp.com/exercises/how-to-bicep-curl-
barbell/) is one of the best bicep movements because it allows you to overload
your muscles with a lot of weight, and it offers a good range of motion.

If you find that the barbell curl bothers your wrists due to the awkward
angle, you can substitute this movement for dumbbell hammer curls or a
preacher curl (machine).

To perform it well, always use a full range of motion and do each repetition
slowly and with control.

## **Main Legs Exercises**

Let’s now take a look at some of the best lower body movements:

### **1\. Squat (Barbell)**

Barbell squats are one of the best knee-dominant exercises you can use to
develop your outer/[inner thighs](https://www.hevyapp.com/inner-thigh-
workout/), quads and glutes ([8](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/22373894/)).
In fact, some research suggests that back squats could be more effective for
glute growth than hip thrusts ([9](https://www.thieme-
connect.de/products/ejournals/abstract/10.1055/a-1082-1126)). According to
research, the front and back squats activate our lower body musculature
similarly, and you should use the one you prefer
([10](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/25630691/)).

### **2\. Bulgarian Split Squat**

Bulgarian split squats are a fantastic exercise you can use to strengthen your
glutes, hamstrings, outer/[inner thighs ](https://www.hevyapp.com/inner-thigh-
workout/)and quads. Training one leg at a time also helps improve your
balance, stability, and side-to-side development.

To do these properly, always prioritize proper technique and a full range of
motion over the amount of weight you’re squatting.

### **3\. Romanian Deadlift (Barbell)**

Romanian deadlifts are one of the best exercises you can do to train your
posterior chain and annihilate your hamstrings
([11](https://www.scopus.com/record/display.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84902115954&origin=inward&txGid=4c67c69b3c7ad9b3534436934d29a906)).
Our hamstrings cross two joints – the hip and the knee. Hip hinge movements
heavily depend on our hamstrings thanks to their ability to store elastic
energy and contribute to hip extension.

To train your hamstrings well, you need to maintain a neutral back and lower
the weight as much as possible before your lower back begins to round.

### **4\. Glute Ham Raise**

Along with Romanian deadlifts, glute-ham raises appear to be the best
hamstring movement out there
([11](https://www.scopus.com/record/display.uri?eid=2-s2.0-84902115954&origin=inward&txGid=4c67c69b3c7ad9b3534436934d29a906)).

Interestingly, the glute-ham raise heavily emphasizes the hamstrings’
eccentric contraction, and research suggests that this could be quite
beneficial
([12](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/abs/pii/S1466853X05000350)).
More specifically, this training type could produce neuromuscular adaptations
that might help with movement proficiency and injury prevention.

## **The Benefits Of The Push Pull Legs**

People from all over the world swear by Push Pull Legs training. The question
is, what makes it so effective? Here are some of its most pronounced benefits:

### **1\. It’s a Simple And Convenient Way to Organize Your Training**

While it may seem a bit complicated, structuring your training with the Push
Pull Legs principles is relatively easy. All you need to do is split your
muscles into three categories – pull, push, and legs. From there, pick your
weekly frequency and go about structuring your different workouts.

Your push workout should include direct work for your chest, shoulders, and
triceps. Pull training will involve work for your back, biceps, and rear
deltoids. You can also do some direct trap work on pull day. Leg day is quite
simple, too, and you’ve probably had to program such workouts before.

### **2\. There Is No Overlap in Muscle Groups**

Most splits out there can work for you. Their primary issue comes from the
overlapping volume. Take, for example, the bench press:

This movement primarily trains your chest, but it also works your triceps and
shoulders ([1](https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC5504579/),[
2](https://journals.lww.com/nsca-
jscr/Fulltext/2010/07000/An_Electromyography_Analysis_of_3_Muscles.31.aspx)).
If you do this exercise on Monday and then go in on Tuesday for tricep or
shoulder work, you can see how that might lead to recovery issues.
Specifically, your triceps and [shoulders ](https://www.hevyapp.com/dumbbell-
shoulder-workout/)will be fatigued from the [bench
press](https://www.hevyapp.com/exercises/how-to-bench-press-barbell/) on
Monday, and you won’t be able to train them as productively.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://www.hevyapp.com/wp-
content/uploads/anastase-maragos-fG0p4Qh_aWI-unsplash-1.jpg)

With some thought, you can overcome this issue. For example, you can schedule
your shoulder and tricep work for later in the week, so they have more time to
recover well. But, this creates a couple of issues:

1\. Having a dedicated workout for each muscle group means that you have to do
more weekly workouts, which can be unsustainable for some people.

2\. You need to be a lot more mindful of which muscle groups are involved (and
when) and sequence them well to prevent training them in a fatigued state.

The Push-Pull Legs split is incredibly effective precisely because it solves
this issue. You get to train all of the involved muscles in a single workout
and train them again several days later, thus making sure that they are fully
recovered.

### **3\. It Offers A Fair Bit of Scheduling Flexibility**

As we’ll see in the next point, the Push-Pull Legs split offers excellent
scheduling flexibility. Unlike many rigid splits out there, the Push-Pull Legs
allow us to switch up our workouts and make them fit our lives better.

For example, the 3-day Push Pull Legs split is a favorite of many precisely
because you can arrange your workouts in numerous ways. If you want to skip
chest day (Monday), you can start your training week on Tuesday or begin your
week with a pull day instead of a push.

If you can’t make it to the gym one day, you can go on the day after and
simply push your remaining workouts by a day. Perhaps you’re freer on the
weekend and can train then? No problem – have two of your workouts on Saturday
and Sunday.

### **4\. It Works For Lifters Of All Levels**

One of the best benefits of the Push-Pull Legs split is that you can make it
useful for yourself no matter your fitness level.

If you’re just starting with training, you can use the 3-day version for
years. Then, as you become late-intermediate, you can switch to a 4-day split.
Eventually, once you’re advanced, you can work up to the final level – the 6
or [7-day Push Pull Legs](https://www.hevyapp.com/7-day-split-workout-
complete-guide/) split.

## **Who Is The Push Pull Legs Workout Program For?**

You’re probably wondering, “This Push Pull Legs split looks great, but will it
work for me?” In most cases, yes – this program is fantastic because it offers
a lot of flexibility and can work for all sorts of trainees.

So long as you stay consistent and push yourself, you can use the Push-Pull
Legs program to make fantastic progress for many years. You can easily track
your progress with [Hevy](https://www.hevyapp.com/), creating your own
routines and logging your workouts. For example, if you’re a complete beginner
or have limited training experience, you can start with the 3-day program.
It’s great because it allows you to accumulate enough training volume each
week, but it’s not too much that you feel overwhelmed. All you have to do is
go to the gym three times, train for 40-55 minutes, and call it a week.

If you want to start even slower only working out twice a week, then perhaps
read into the [5×5 workout](https://www.hevyapp.com/5x5-workout/) or the
[Upper / Lower split](https://www.hevyapp.com/upper-lower-split-complete-
guide/). Since they both only have two routines in the plan, it’s easier to
schedule them in a week in order to workout your whole body in any given week.

As you become an intermediate and notice that you’re not progressing well with
three weekly workouts, you can bump your training frequency to four times per
week or try a [PHUL training program](https://www.hevyapp.com/phul-power-
hypertrophy-upper-lower/). That way, you can do more volume and kickstart the
progress.

Eventually, as you become more advanced, you can even bump the frequency
higher – to six days per week. This is a great way to do a lot of training
every week and push for consistent and reliable progress.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://www.hevyapp.com/wp-
content/uploads/lyfe-fuel-phY30gaxqS8-unsplash-2.jpg)

## **Rest Days On the Push Pull Legs**

A great benefit of the Push-Pull Legs split is that you can schedule it in
several ways depending on your experience, preferences, and ability to train.

For example, the 3-day split is fantastic because you can schedule it in
numerous ways. Say that you want to skip the Monday rush to the gym. No
problem. Here’s an example:

Monday – Off  
Tuesday – Push  
Wednesday – Off  
Thursday – Pull  
Friday – Off  
Saturday – Legs  
Sunday – Off

Or what if you can’t make it to the gym on Tuesdays, Wednesdays, and
Thursdays. No problem:

Monday – Push  
Tuesday – Off  
Wednesday – Off  
Thursday – Off  
Friday – Pull  
Saturday – Legs  
Sunday – Off

If you want, you can even train three consecutive days, and then take four
days off. While this may not be the best way to go about it, you can make it
work:

Monday – Pull  
Tuesday – Push  
Wednesday – Legs  
Thursday – Off  
Friday – Off  
Saturday – Off  
Sunday – Off

The 4-day split is also somewhat flexible as you have some room to switch
around workouts if you have to.

The only exception here is the 6-day split, as it doesn’t offer much
flexibility. Then again, advanced lifters will typically use this split, and
they will be reasonably used to making it to the gym at least five times per
week.

## **What Are The Pros And Cons of Push Pull Legs?**

Let’s take a look at four of the most pronounced benefits of this split:

### **Pros**

  * Among the most notable benefits of the Push Pull Legs split is that it allows us to ‘bundle’ muscle groups that typically work together. For example, the biceps contribute to pulling movements, and training both muscle groups in the same workout is an efficient way to cause a stimulus.
  * Because we bundle muscle groups that work well together, we effectively prevent overlap, and the risk of training muscle groups in a fatigued state is much lower. For example, if you train your chest, shoulders, and triceps on Monday, you will have several days to recover before you have to train them again, no matter what training frequency you follow.
  * The Push Pull Legs split is fantastic for the average trainee because it offers great scheduling flexibility. For example, if you follow the 3-day split, you can arrange your weekly training in numerous ways depending on your schedule, life stressors, and availability to train. What if you can’t start your training week on Monday? No problem, you can begin Tuesday or even Wednesday.
  * The Push Pull Legs split works for lifters of all levels, and you can use it to make great progress for many years. For example, as you first start training, you can follow the 3-day split. Then, as you advance, you can jump on a 4-day a week frequency and eventually work up to training six days per week. No matter what your goals and fitness level are, you can make it work.

### **Cons**

Before moving on, however, here are some of the potential cons you should be
aware of:

  * Focusing on every muscle group can be quite challenging. For example, if you start your push workouts with chest training, your triceps and shoulders will have to come in as second and third. Because of that, it might be a good idea to alternate the movement you start your workouts with. If you begin one workout with a chest exercise, you may want to start the next one with a shoulder movement.
  * The traditional Push Pull Legs split isn’t your best option for attacking weak points and bringing them up. For example, say that your arms are a weak point and grow slowly. The problem is, you always train your biceps and triceps in a fatigued state after back and chest. This prevents you from giving them your full attention and training them in a recovered state. One solution would be to include more work for lagging body parts strategically. In the case of arm training, you could add a separate arm day in addition to your push and pull training.
  * It’s challenging to establish a consistent training schedule with the Push Pull Legs split if you want to train four or five times per week. For example, training three and six days per week allows you to have a consistent schedule. Having a workout tracker with a built-in calendar like [Hevy](https://www.hevyapp.com/) will definitely help. But, if you want to train four or five days per week (as many intermediates do), your plan will change from week to week.

## **Comparison With Other Training Plans**

Let’s see how the Push Pull Legs split stacks up against other popular
options:

### **Push Pull Legs vs. 3-Day Split**

The 3-day full body split is one that allows you to train your entire body
three days per week. It’s great for beginners because it allows them to
improve their skills of lifting weights more quickly. For example, a beginner
would become proficient with the squat a lot quicker if they train it three
times per week instead of once.

The 3-day Push Pull Legs split is also great, but it may fall short for
complete beginners precisely because learning the different exercises takes
much longer. For this reason, complete beginners would be better off with a
[3-day full-body split](https://www.hevyapp.com/3-day-split-workout-complete-
guide/). Once they gain some training experience and improve their skills of
lifting weights, they can transition to a 3-day Push Pull Legs program.

After a while, lifters can increase the frequency to four or six days.

Overall, the [3-day full-body program](https://www.hevyapp.com/3-day-split-
workout-complete-guide/) is better suited for complete beginners, but lifters
should then transition to something like a Push-Pull Legs split to keep making
great progress.

### **Push Pull Legs vs. Upper Lower Split**

The Push-Pull Legs and [upper-lower](https://www.hevyapp.com/upper-lower-
split-complete-guide/) splits are perhaps the two most popular ways of
organizing our weekly training. For the longest time, we’ve had a debate going
on: Which of the two is better?

It’s difficult to say because both splits offer their unique benefits and
drawbacks, and both are more similar than most people imagine. In truth, the
[upper-lower](https://www.hevyapp.com/upper-lower-split-complete-guide/) split
is almost the same as the Push-Pull Legs. The primary difference is that you
combine your push and pull workouts into a single upper day.

As far as their benefits go, the Push-Pull Legs split is simple to program but
scheduling it can be challenging, especially if you want to train four days
per week. You won’t have a consistent schedule from week to week, which can be
disheartening for some people.

On the other hand, the [4-day upper-lower](https://www.hevyapp.com/upper-
lower-split-complete-guide/) split is fantastic for intermediate-level lifters
and allows them to make significant progress for years. However, the upper-
lower split is a bit more challenging to program because you have more muscle
groups to worry about on your upper days. Knowing how to sequence the
exercises and avoid doing too much work can be difficult.

You won’t go wrong with either of the two splits, and it’s worth trying them
out to see which one you prefer. With consistency, good nutrition, and plenty
of sleep, both of these splits would be fantastic for you. A huge part of
staying consistent is tracking your workouts, for which you can use
[Hevy](https://www.hevyapp.com/) for free.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://www.hevyapp.com/wp-
content/uploads/anastase-maragos-HyvE5SiKMUs-unsplash-2.jpg)

### **Push Pull Legs vs.[Bro Split](https://www.hevyapp.com/bro-split-workout-
program-guide/)**

The 3-day versions of the Push-Pull Legs and [bro
splits](https://www.hevyapp.com/bro-split-workout-program-guide/) are more
similar than most people imagine. In truth, a 3-day Push Pull Legs program is
a slightly modified [bro split](https://www.hevyapp.com/bro-split-workout-
program-guide/). Here is how it looks:

Day 1 – chest, shoulders, and triceps (push)  
Day 2 – back and biceps (pull)  
Day 3 – legs

As a whole, this is a fun way to train and works well because you focus on a
handful of muscles, train them hard, and then give them lots of time to
recover. At a higher frequency, the [bro split](https://www.hevyapp.com/bro-
split-workout-program-guide/) becomes even more engaging because you have to
train one or two muscle groups per workout, which allows you to do lots of
exercises.

The primary downside of the [bro split](https://www.hevyapp.com/bro-split-
workout-program-guide/) is the low training frequency. According to research,
training our muscles twice per week should result in greater hypertrophy
([13](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/27102172/)). This is where a high-
frequency Push-Pull Legs split might deliver better results. For example, a
6-day version:

Day 1 – Push  
Day 2 – Pull  
Day 3 – Legs  
Day 4 – Push  
Day 5 – Pull  
Day 6 – Legs  
Day 7 – Rest

While more demanding, this split allows you to accumulate a lot of training
volume and train each muscle group twice per week. What’s more, it enables you
to do most exercises more frequently, which could benefit strength gains.

## **Conclusion**

The Push-Pull Legs split is one of the best ways to organize your weekly
training. The split is quite similar to the [upper-
lower](https://www.hevyapp.com/upper-lower-split-complete-guide/) program and
works great for two primary reasons:

  * It offers fantastic scheduling flexibility. No matter how often you can make it to the gym, you can make the Push Pull Legs split work for you.
  * It works great for lifters of all levels. As we discussed above, the 3-day full body split tends to work better for complete beginners. But after that point, you can use it for many years and make fantastic gains.

Of course, like many other training approaches, the Push-Pull Legs split also
carries some drawbacks. The most apparent one is the fact that establishing a
consistent training schedule can be a bit difficult. Still, with a bit of
thought and smart programming, you can make it work incredibly well for
yourself.

![](data:image/gif;base64,R0lGODlhAQABAAAAACH5BAEKAAEALAAAAAABAAEAAAICTAEAOw==)![](https://www.hevyapp.com/wp-
content/uploads/anastase-maragos-aclkvEMIfL8-unsplash.jpg)

If you’re an advanced lifter and are looking for a great split, the 6-day Push
Pull Legs version is one of your best choices. It offers a consistent weekly
schedule, you have more than enough opportunities to accumulate enough weekly
training volume, and you get to train each muscle group twice per week.

In case you’re wondering between the Push-Pull Legs and [upper-
lower](https://www.hevyapp.com/upper-lower-split-complete-guide/) split, it
mostly comes down to personal preference and your schedule. If you want to
train four days per week and follow the same plan from week to week, the
[upper-lower](https://www.hevyapp.com/upper-lower-split-complete-guide/) split
might be a great alternative.

## **Frequently Asked Questions**

Here are the most frequently asked questions about the Push-Pull Legs routine:

**What is a Push-Pull Legs training plan?**

The Push-Pull Legs split is a way of organizing your weekly training into
three categories:  
– Push workouts where you train your chest, shoulders, and triceps  
– Pull workouts where you train your back and biceps  
– Legs workouts where you train your glutes, hamstrings, quads, and calves  
That way, you combine different muscle groups with similar functions.

**When should I do cardio when doing a Push-Pull Legs plan?**

To minimize the interference effect of cardio, your best options are
([15](https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24728927/)):  
– Do your cardio on recovery days  
– Do cardio at least six hours before or after your weight training  
– Do cardio after lifting weights, but keep the volume lower – around twenty
minutes

**How many exercises per muscle group in a Push-Pull Legs workout?**

Ideally, you should do two exercises per muscle group per workout. For
example, in a push workout, it would look like this:  
– Chest – two movements (flat and incline press)  
– Shoulders – two movements (overhead press and lateral raises)  
– Triceps – two tricep extension movements  
  
For legs, it might be one to two movements per muscle group:  
– Quads – two movements (Squats and Bulgarian Split Squat)  
– Hamstrings – two movements (Romanian Deadlift and Standing Leg Curl)  
– Calves – one to two calf raise variations  
– Glutes – one movement (Glute Ham Raise)

**Why is the Push-Pull Legs plan superior?**

The Push-Pull Legs plan is superior to many programs and routines because it:  
– Offers great scheduling flexibility  
– Bundles together muscle groups that work synergistically  
– Helps prevent overlap volume well  
– Is relatively simple to set up

**How long should my workouts be?**

You shouldn’t try to fit in a specific time frame. Your workout should be as
long as it needs to be for you to do everything in a controlled manner:  
– Your warm-ups  
– Every set  
– Adequate rest between sets  
For the intermediate lifter, a workout should be around 50 to 75 minutes long.

**Is Push Pull Legs a good routine for gym beginners?**

The 3-day version of the push-pull legs split is good for beginners because it
helps them get into the habit of training. It’s not overwhelming but it allows
new lifters to do enough productive work. Plus, thanks to the simplicity it
offers, the push-pull legs split is a good option for newbies.

